boom hello Ben hey there good to see you
man yeah it's a pleasure to be here
thanks for doing this yeah yeah thanks
thanks for having me I've been I've been
looking at some of your shows in the
last last few days just to to get a
sense of how you're thinking about AI
and crypto and the various other things
I'm involved in it's been interesting
well I've been following you as well
I've been paying attention to a lot of
your lectures and talks and different
things you've done over the last couple
days as well getting ready for this
it's a AI is either people are really
excited about it or they're really
terrified of it those are the sort it
seems to be the two responses either
people have this dismal view of these
robots taking over the world or they
think it's going to be some amazing sort
of symbiotic relationship with it we
have with these things it's gonna evolve
human beings past the the monkey stage
that we're at right now yeah I tend to
be on the lather more positive side of
this dichotomy but I think one thing
that has struck me in recent years is
many people are now you know mentally
confronting all the issues of writing AI
for the first time and I I mean I've
been working on AI for three decades and
I first started thinking about AI when I
was a little kid in the early late 60s
and early 70s when I saw a eyes and
robots on the original Star Trek so I
guess I've had a lot of cycles to
process the positives and negatives of
it where it's now like suddenly most of
the world is thinking through all this
for the first for the first time and you
know when you first wrap your brain
around the idea that there may be
creatures ten thousand or a million
times smarter than human beings at first
this is a bit of a shocker right and
then I mean it takes a while to
internalize this into your worldview
well it's that there's also I think
there's a problem with the term
artificial intelligence because it's
it's it's intelligent it's there it's a
real thing
yeah it's not artificial it's not like a
fake diamond or fake Ferrari it's a real
thing and it's not a great term there's
been many attempts to replace it with
synthetic intelligence for example but
for better or worse like AI is there
it's part of the popular imagination
that seems it's an imperfect word but
it's it's not going away
well I my question is like are we
married to this idea of intelligence and
of life being biological being
carbon-based tissue and cells and blood
and or insects or mammals or fish or are
we married to that too much do you think
that it's entirely possible that what
human beings are doing and what people
that are at the tip of AI right now that
are really pushing the technology what
they're doing is really creating a new
life-form that it's it's going to be a
new thing that just the same way we
recognize wasps and buffalos and
artificial intelligence is just going to
be a life-form that emerges from the
creativity and ingenuity of human beings
well indeed so I mean I've long been an
advocate of a philosophy I think of as
pattern ISM like it's the pattern of
organization that appears to be the the
critical thing and the you know the
individual cells and going down further
like the molecules and particles in our
body are are turning over all the time
so it's not the specific combination of
elementary particles which makes me who
I am or makes you who you are
it's a pattern by which they're
organized and the patterns by which they
change over time so I mean if we can
create digital systems or quantum
computers or femto computers or whatever
it is manifesting the patterns of
organization that constitute
intelligence I mean then then there you
are there there is intelligence right so
that that's not to say that you know
consciousness and experience is just
about patterns of organization there may
be more dimensions to it but when when
you look at what constitutes
intelligence thinking cognition
problem-solving you know it's the
pattern of organism
not the specific material as as far as
we can tell so we can see no reason
based on all the science that we know so
far that you couldn't make an
intelligent system out of some other
form of matter rather than the specific
types of atoms and molecules that make
up human beings and it seems that were
we're well on the way to being able to
do so when you're studying when you're
studying intelligence you're studying
artificial intelligence did you spend
any time studying the patterns that
insects seem to cooperatively behave
with like how leafcutter ants build
these elaborate structures underground
and you know wasps build these giant
colonies and did you study how I did
actually yes so I I I sort of grew up
with the philosophy of complex systems
which was championed by that by the
Santa Fe Institute in the 1980s and the
whole concept that there is an
interdisciplinary complex system science
which includes you know biology
cosmology psychology sociology there's
sort of Universal patterns of of
self-organization and you know ants and
ant colonies that have long been the
paradigm case for that now
I I used to play with the end colonies
in my backyard when I was a kid and
you'd lay down food in certain patterns
you'd see how their answer laying down
pheromones and the colonies are
organizing in the in a certain way and
that's an interesting self-organizing
complex system on its own it's lacking
some types of adaptive intelligence that
that human minds and human societies
have but but it has also interesting
self-organizing patterns this reminds me
of the novel Solaris by Stanislaw LEM
which was published in the sixties which
was really quite quite a deep novel much
deeper than the movie that was made of
it did you ever read the book so Larry
so what I'm not familiar with the movie
either who well so where there was an
amazed
brilliant movie by Tarkovsky the Russian
director from the late 60s then there
was a movie by Steven Soderbergh which
was sort of climbed up and Americanized
and all that was fairly recent yeah ten
years ago but that wasn't didn't get all
the deep points in the novel the
original novel in essence there's this
there's this ocean coating the surface
of some alien planet which has amazingly
complex fractal patterns of organization
and it's also interactive like the
patterns of organization on the ocean
respond based on what you do and when
people get near the ocean it causes them
to hallucinate things and even causes
them to see simulacra of people from
their past even the like the person who
they had most harmed or injured in their
past appears and interacts with them so
clearly this ocean has some type of
amazing complexity and intelligence from
the patterns it displays and from the
weird things it reeks in your mind so
that the people on earth
try to understand how the ocean is
thinking they sent a scientific
expedition there to to interact with
that ocean but it's just so alien even
though it monkeys with people's minds
and clearly is doing complex things no
two-way communication is ever is ever
established and eventually the the human
expedition gives up and goes home so
it's a very Russian ending to the novel
I guess it's not I saw that but that the
the interest the interesting message
there is I mean there can be many many
kinds of intelligence right I mean human
intelligence is one thing the
intelligence of an ant colony is a
different thing the intelligence of
human society is a different thing
ecosystem is a different thing and there
could be many many types of AIS that we
could build with many many different
properties some could be wonderful to
human beings some could be horrible to
human beings some could just be alien
Minds that that we can't even relate
relate relate to
very very well so we we have a very
limited conception of what an
intelligence is if we just think by
close analogy to to human minds and this
this is important if you're thinking
about engineering or growing are the
official art forms their artificial
minds because it it's not just can we do
this it's what kind of mind are we going
to engineer or evolve and there's
there's a huge spectrum of possibilities
yeah that's one of the reasons why I
asked if we've created if human beings
had created some sort of an insect and
this insect started organizing and
developing these complex colonies like a
leaf cutter ant and building these
structures underground people would go
crazy they would panic they would think
these things are organizing they're
gonna they're going to build up the
resources and attack us they're gonna
try to take over humanity I mean this
what what people are worried about more
than anything when it comes to
technology I think is the idea that
we're going to be irrelevant that we're
going to be antiques and that something
new and better is going to take our
place which is which is all most of them
oh yeah so we're thinking worried about
it because it's sort of the history of
biological life on earth I mean well
yeah there's complex things they become
more accomplished Eldora isms to
multi-celled organisms there seems to be
a pattern leading up to us and us with
this unprecedented ability to change our
environment that's what we can do right
we can manipulate things poison the
environment we can blow up entire
countries with bombs if we'd like to and
we can also do wild creative things like
send signals through space and land on
someone else's phone on the other side
of the world almost instantaneously we
have incredible power but we're also
we're also so limited by our biology
yeah the thing I think people are afraid
of and I I'm afraid of but I don't know
if it makes any sense is that the next
level of life whatever artificial life
is or whatever the the the the human
symbiotic that it's going to lack
emotions it's going to lack desires and
needs and all the things that we think
are special about us our creativity our
desire for attention and love all
our camaraderie all these different
things that are sort of programmed into
us with with our genetics in order to
advance our species that we we were so
connected to these things but they're so
that the reason for war they're the
reason for the lies deception thievery
there's so many things that are built
into being a person that are responsible
for all the woes of humanity but we're
afraid to lose oh yeah I think it's it's
almost inevitable by this point that
humanity is going to create synthetic
intelligences with tremendously greater
general intelligence and practical
capability than human beings have I mean
I think I know how to do that with the
software I'm working on with my own team
but if we fail you know there's a load
of other teams who I think are a bit
behind us but they're going in the same
direction now I feel like you're at the
tip of the spear with the stuff I do but
I also think that's not the most
important thing from a human perspective
the most important thing is that
humanity as a whole is quite close to
this this threshold event right so how
far do you think it's quite close by my
own gut feeling five to thirty years
let's say that's pretty close but if I'm
wrong and it's a hundred years like in
the historical timescale that sort of
doesn't matter it's like did the
Sumerians create civilization ten
thousand or ten thousand and fifty years
ago like what what difference does it
make right so I think we're quite close
to creating superhuman artificial
general intelligence and that's in a way
almost inevitable given where we are now
on the other hand I think we still have
some agency regarding whether this comes
out in a way that you know respects
human values and culture which are
important to us now given who and what
we are yeah or that is essentially
indifferent to human values and culture
in the same way that we're mostly
indifferent to chimpanzee values and
cult
at this point I'm completely indifferent
to insect values and culture not
completely if you think about it I mean
if I'm building a new house
I will bulldoze a bunch of ants but yet
we get upset if we extinct an insect
species right so we we care we care to
some level but not but we but we would
like the super ai's to care about us
more than we care about insects or
gradation solutely right and I think
this this is something we can impact
right now and to to be honest I mean in
a certain part of my mind I can think
well like in the end I don't matter that
much my four kids don't matter that much
my granddaughter doesn't matter that
much like we are patterns of
organization in a very long lineage of
patterns of organization and they matter
very much to you yeah and another you
know dinosaurs came in one and the under
thoughts came in what humans may come
and go the a is that we create may come
and go and that's the nature of the
universe but on the other hand of course
in my heart from my situated perspective
as an individual human like if some AI
tried to annihilate my my ten month old
son that would try to kill that AI right
like so as as a human being situated in
this specific you know species place and
time I care a lot about the condition of
all of us humans and so I would like to
not only create a powerful general
intelligence but but create one which
which is is going to be beneficial to
humans and other life forms on the
planet even while in some ways going
going beyond everything that we are
right and there can't be any guarantees
about something like this on the other
hand Humanity has really never had any
guarantees about anything anyway right i
mean since since since since we created
civilization we've been leaping into the
unknown one time after the other in the
somewhat conscious and software
we're way about it from you know
agriculture to language to math to the
Industrial Revolution were leaping into
the unknown all the time which is part
of why we're where we are today instead
of just another animal species right so
we can't have a guarantee that AGI is
artificial general intelligence as we
create are going to do what we consider
the right thing given our current value
systems on the other hand I suspect we
can bias the odds in the favor of human
values and and culture and that's
something of I've put a lot of thought
and work into alongside the you know the
basic algorithms of artificial cognition
is the issue that the initial creation
would be subject to our programming but
that it could perhaps program something
more efficient and design something like
if you build create you have to I mean
general generalization is about
creativity right yeah but is the issue
that it would choose to not accept our
values which it might follow clearly
will choose not to accept our values and
we want it to choose not to accept all
of our values so it's more a matter of
whether the ongoing creation evolution
of new values occurs with some
continuity and respect for the previous
ones so I mean with I have four human
kids now one is a baby but the other
three are adults right and with each of
them I took the approach of trying to
teach the kids what my values were not
just by preaching at them by entering
wisdom into shared situations but then
you know when your kids grow up they're
gonna go in their own different
directions right and these are humans
but but they all have the same sort of
biological needs which is one of the
most they're still as an analogy I think
the AI is that we create you can think
of as our mind children and
we're starting them off with our culture
and values if we do it properly or at
least with a certain subset of the whole
diverse self-contradictory mess of human
culture and values but you know they're
going to evolve in a different direction
but you want that evolution to take
place in a reflective and caring way
rather than the heedless way because if
you think about it the average human a
thousand years ago or even 50 years ago
would have thought you and me were like
hopelessly immoral miscreants who would
abandoned all the valuable think things
in life right I mean I'm I mean I'm an
infidel right I don't I don't I haven't
gone to church ever I guess I mean my my
mother is lesbian right I mean there's
all these things that we take for
granted now that not that long ago were
completely against what most humans
considered maybe the most important
values of life so I mean human values
itself is completely a moving a moving
target right and something in our
generation yeah yeah yeah in our
generation pretty radically very
radically when I think back like to my
childhood I lived in New Jersey for nine
years of my childhood and just the level
of racism and anti-semitism and sexism
that were just I'm ambient and taken for
granted then was this between I think if
this were the same age were both yeah
yeah yeah everyone in 66 I lived in
Jersey from 73 to 82 okay so I was there
from 67 to 73 oh yeah yeah so yeah I
mean like my I mean my sister went to
the high school from with a with a black
guy and so we got our car turned upside
down the windows of our house smashed it
was like a you humongous thing and it's
almost unbelievable now right because
not
now no one would care care whatsoever
it's just life certainly into some
fringe parts of this guy yeah yeah but
but still the point is there is no fixed
list of values human values it's an
ongoing evolving process and what you
want is for the evolution of the AIS
values to be coupled closely with the
evolution of human values rather than
going off in some other Li different
direction that we can't even understand
so this is literally playing God right I
mean if you're talking about like trying
to program in values I don't think you
can program ins values that fully you
can program in a system for learning and
growing values and here again the analog
analogy with human kids is not hopeless
like telling telling your kids these are
the ten things that are important
doesn't work that well right what what
works better is you enter into shared
situations with them they see how you
deal with the situations you guide them
in dealing with real situations and that
forms their system of values and this is
what needs to happen with a eyes they
need to grow up entering into real-life
situations with human beings so that the
real life patterns of human values which
are worth a lot more than the the
homilies that we enunciate formerly
wrote the real life pattern of human
values gets inculcate enlike into the
intellectual DNA of the AI systems and
this is part of what worries me about
the way the AI field is going at this
moment because I mean most of the really
powerful narrow AI eyes on the planet
now are involved with like selling
people stuff they don't need spying on
people or like figuring out who should
be killed or otherwise abused by some
government right so if the early stage a
is that we build turn into general
intelligences gradually and these
general intelligences are you know spy
agents and advertising agents and like
what what what mindset did he
early stage a eyes have as they grow
right if they don't have any problem
morally and ethically with manipulating
us which were very malleable right we're
so easy to manipulate what we're
teaching them we're teaching them to
manipulate keep on we're rewarding them
for doing it successfully right yeah so
this is this is one of these things that
from the outside point of view might not
seem to be all that intelligent it's
sort of like gun laws in the u.s. living
in Hong Kong I mean most people don't
have a bunch of guns sitting around
their house and coincidentally there
there are not that many random shootings
happening in Hong Kong so yeah you look
in the you coincidence yeah you look in
the u.s. it's like somehow you have laws
that allow random lunatics to buy all
the guns they want and you have all
these people getting shot so similarly
like from the outside you could look at
it like this species is creating the
successor intelligence and almost all
the resources going into creating their
successor intelligence are going into
making a eyes to do surveillance like
military drones and advertising agents
that brainwash people into buying crap
they don't need know what I think what's
wrong with this picture
isn't that just because that's where the
money is like this is the yes is the
introduction to it and then from then
we'll find other uses and applications
for it but like right now that's where
there's a little thing is there's a lot
of other applications financial
financially viable well yeah the
applications that are getting the most
attention are the financial lowest
hanging fruit right so for example among
many projects I'm doing with my
singularity net team we're looking at
applying AI to you know diagnosed
agricultural disease so you can you can
look at images of plant leaves you can
look at data from the soil and
atmosphere and you can project whether
disease in a plant is likely to progress
badly or not which tells you do you need
medicine for the planet do you need
pesticides now this this is an
interesting area of application it's
probably quite financially
lucrative in a way but it's a more
complex industry than then selling stuff
online so the fraction of resources
going into AI for agriculture is very
small than like e-commerce or some very
specific aspect of agriculture to
predicting diseases yeah yeah but there
there's there's a lot of specific
aspects right so I mean AI for medicine
again there's been papers on machine
learning applied to medicine since the
80s and 90s but the amount of effort
going into that compared to advertising
or surveillance is very small now this
has to do with the structure of the
pharmaceutical business as compared to
the structure of the tech business so
you know when you look into it there's
there's there's good reasons there's
good reasons for for everything right
but nevertheless the way things are
coming out coming down right now is
certain biases to the development of
early stage a eyes are very market and
then you could you could you could see
them and I mean I'm trying to do
something about that together with my
colleagues in singularity net but of
course we're so it's sort of a David
versus Goliath thing it seemed well of
course you're trying to do something
different and I think it's awesome what
you guys are doing but it just makes
sense to me that the first applications
are going to be the ones that are more
financially viable it's like well the
first applications were military right I
mean until about ten years ago 85% of
all funding in the AI was from us plus
plus Western Europe militaries well what
I'm getting at is it
it seems that money and and commerce are
inexorably linked to innovation and
technology because there's this sort of
thing that we do as a culture where
we're constantly trying to buy and
purchase bigger and better things we
always want the newest iPhone the
greatest you know a laptop we don't want
them to the coolest electric cars
whatever whatever it is and this fuels
innovation this this desire for new
greater things materialism in a lot of
ways fuels innovation because this is a
buzz but I think there's an argument
that
as we approach a technological
singularity we need new systems because
if you look at that things have happened
during the last century what's happened
is that governments have funded most of
the core innovation I mean this is well
known that like most of the technology
inside the smartphone was funded by US
government a little about European
government GPS and the batteries and
everything and then companies scaled it
up that they made it user-friendly they
decreased cost of manufacturing and this
process occurs with a certain time cycle
tour like government spends decades
funding core innovation and universities
and then industry spends decades
figuring how to scaled up and make it
palatable to users and you know this
matured probably since World War two the
this sort of modality for technology
development but now that things are
developing faster and faster and faster
there's sort of not time for for that
cycle to occur where the government and
universities incubate new ideas for a
while and then technology scales it up
so genies out of the bottle essentially
yeah but we still need a lot of new
amazing creative innovation to her and
but somehow our other news new
structures are gonna have to evolve to
make it happen and you can see
everyone's struggling to figure out what
these are so I mean this is why you have
I mean you have big companies embracing
open-source Google releases tensorflow
in there and there's a lot of a lot of
other different things and I think I
think some projects in the
cryptocurrency world have been looking
at that too like how do we use tokens to
incentivize you know independent
scientists and inventors to do this
stuff without them having to be in the
government research lab or in a big
company so I think we're gonna need the
evolution of new systems of innovation
and of technology transfer as things are
are developing faster and faster and
faster and this is another thing that
sort of got me interested in the whole
decentralized world and the block
is the promise of new modes of economic
and social organization that can you
know bring more of the world into the
research process and accelerate the
technology transfer process I definitely
want to talk about that one of the
things that I wanted to ask you is when
when you're discussing this well I think
what your mate is saying is of one very
important point that we need to move
past the military gatekeepers of
Technology right not just military
though though it's it's big tech which
are at advertising agencies in social
media things that are constantly
predicting your next purchase right yeah
because if you think if you think about
it and I mean even in a sunny democracy
like we have in the US I mean those who
control the brainwashing of the public
in essence control who votes for what
and who controls the brainwashing of the
public is advertising agencies and who
increasingly are the biggest advertising
agencies are the big tech companies who
are accumulating everybody's data and
using it to to program their minds to
buy things so this is what's programming
the global brain of the human race and
of course there are close links between
big tech and in the military like look
at Amazon has what 25 thousand person
headquarters in Crystal City Virginia
right next to the Pentagon and I mean
China it's even more direct and
unapologetic right so it's a new like
military industrial advertising complex
which is is guiding the evolution of the
global brain on the planet which found
that with this past election right with
all the intrusion by foreign entities
trying to influence the election that
they've these giant houses set up to
write bad stories about whoever they
don't want to be in office yeah in a way
that's almost a red herring but it I
mean the Russian stuff is almost a red
herring but it reveals what the
processes are which are used to program
oh because I think the whatever
programming of America
mine's is done by the Russians is many
minuscule compared to the programming of
Americans minds but I got the American
yeah American corporate and government
elite it's fascinating that anybody's
even jumping in as well yeah sure it's
it's it's it's interesting and if you
look at what's happening in China that's
like yeah yeah yeah they're they're way
better than we are much more horrific
right and as well it's more it's more
professional it's more polished it's
more centralized yeah on the other hand
for almost everyone in China
China is a very good place to live and
you know the level of improvement in
that country in the last thirty years
has just been astounding right lucky I
mean you can't you can't argue with how
much better it's gotten there something
took over it's it's tremendous because
they're not they embraced capitalism to
a certain extent they've created their
own unique system what what labels you
give it is is almost arbitrary they
they've created their own unique system
as a you know crazy hippie libertarian
anarchist socialist freedom-loving
maniac that system rubs against migraine
in many ways on the other hand
empirically if you look at it it's
improved the well-being of a of a
tremendous number of people so hopefully
it evolves and it's one but the way it's
evolving now is not in the more pop
freedom love well it's not in a more
freedom loving and anarchic direction
what one would say it's positive in some
ways and negative and others like most
um I fell in love with a Chinese woman
she's she has great reason we had a baby
recently she she's not from Hong Kong
she's from mainland China I met her when
she was doing her PhD in computational
linguistics and shaman but that was what
sort of first got me to spend a lot of
time in China but then I was doing some
research at Hong Kong Polytechnic
University and then my good friend
David Hansen was visiting me in Hong
Kong I introduced him to some investors
there which ended up with him bringing
his company Henson robotics to Hong Kong
so now after I moved there because of
falling in love with the writing then I
brought my friend David there then
Henson Robotics grew up there and
there's actually a good reason for
Hanson robotics to be there because I'm
in the best place in the world the
manufacturer complex electronics is in
you know Shenzhen right across the
border from Hong Kong so now I've I've
been working there with Hanson robotics
on the Sophia robots and other robots
for for a while and I've accumulated the
whole AI team there around Hanson
robotics and singularity in that so I
mean by but now I'm there because my
whole a AI and robotics teams are there
right makes sense
do you follow the the State Department's
recommendations to not use Huawei
devices and they believe that their own
oh you heard that yeah I mean that the
Chinese are spying on us you know I'm
sure you know when I lived him I lived
in Washington DC for nine years I did a
bunch of consulting for various
government agencies there and my wife is
a communist party member actually well
just because she joined in high school
when it was sort of suggested for her to
join so I'm sure I'm being watched by
multiple governments it doesn't I don't
have any secrets and it doesn't really
matter I'm I'm not in the business of
trying to overthrow any government I'm
I'm in the business of trying to bypass
traditional governments and traditional
monetary systems and all the rest by
creating new methods of organization of
people and and information I understand
that with you personally but it is
unusual if the government is actually
spying on people through these divides
now that's unusual I don't it's unusual
at all I mean III I mean without going
into too much detail like when I was in
DC working with various government
agencies it became clear
there is tremendously more information
obtained by government agencies than
most people realize well this was this
was true way before Snowden and
WikiLeaks and all these revelations and
what is publicly understood now is
probably not the full scope of the
information that governments have other
so I mean privacy is is pretty much dead
and david brin do you know david brin no
you should definitely interview david
he's an amazing guy but he's a
well-known science-fiction writer he's
based in in Southern California San
Diego but he wrote a book in all years
ago called the transparent society where
he said there's two possibilities
surveillance and sousveillance it's like
the power elite watching everyone or
everyone watching everyone
I think everyone watching yeah well yeah
but he so he articulated this as the own
essentially the only two viable
possibilities and he's like we should be
choosing and then creating which of
these alternatives we want so now now
the world is starting to understand what
he was talking about back back when he
wrote that book like really write the
book oh I can't remember it was well
more than the decade it gets weird when
some people just nail it on the head
decades in advance I mean most of the
things that are happening in the world
now were foreseen by a Stanislaw LEM the
Polish author I mentioned Valentin
Turchin a friend of mine who was the
founder of Russia and I he wrote a book
called the phenomenon of science in the
late 60s and you know in 1971 or two
when I was a little kid I read a book
called the Prometheus project by a
Princeton physicist called Gerald
Feinberg you read a physicists book when
you're 5 years old yeah started reading
when I was 2 my grandfather was a
physicist so he I was reading a lot of
stuff then but he Feinberg in this book
he said you know within the next few
decades humanity is gonna create none of
technology it's going to create machine
smarter than people and it's going to
create the technology to allow human
biological immortality and the question
will be do we want to use these
technologies
you know to promote rampant consumerism
do we want to use these technologies to
promote you know spiritual growth of our
of our consciousness into new dimensions
of experience and what fun drug proposed
in this book in the late 60s which I
read in the early 70s he proposed the UN
she'd sent a task force out to go to
everyone in the world every little
African village and educate the world
about nanotech life extension and an AGI
and get the whole world to vote on
whether we should develop these
technologies toward consumerism or
toward consciousness expansion so I read
this from a little kid it's like this is
almost obvious this makes total sense
like why why doesn't everyone understand
this then I tried to explain this to
people and I'm like oh shit I guess it's
gonna be a while till the world catches
on so so I instead decided I should
build a spacecraft go away from the
world at rapid speed and come back after
like a million years or something when
the world was far more advanced so or
covered in dust yeah right so now well
then you go in another million years to
see where they only evolve but so now
pretty much - the world agrees that life
extension AGI and nanotechnology are
plausible things that may come about in
the near future the same question is is
there that that that Feinberg saw like
50 years ago right the same question is
there like do we develop this for
rampant consumerism or do we develop
this for amazing new dimensions of you
know consciousness expansion and mental
growth but the UN is not in fact
educating the world about this and
pulling them to decide democratically
what to do on the other hand there's the
possibility that by bypassing
governments in the UN and doing
something decentralized you can create a
democratic framework you know within
which you know a broad swath of the
world can be involved in the
participatory way in guiding the
direction of these advances do you think
that it's possible that in
of choosing that we're just gonna have
multiple directions that it's growing in
that there's going to be consumer baby
it will be multiple directions and it's
that that's inevitable it's more a
matter of whether anything besides the
military advertising complex gets a
shake right right so I mean if you look
in the software development world open
source is an amazing thing right Linux
is awesome and it's led to so much AI
being open open-source now now open
source didn't have to actually take over
the entire software world like Richard
Stallman Moreland in order to have a
huge impact right it's enough that it's
a major force so I mean it's very hippie
concept isn't it open source in a lot of
ways in a way but but yet idea iBM has
probably thousands of people working on
Linux right so like Apple it began as a
hippie concept but it became very
practical right so I mean something like
75% of all the servers running the
Internet are based in Linux you know the
vast majority of mobile phone OS is
Linux right so this is the vast majority
being an Android is Lex yeah yeah so I
mean this hippie crazy thing where no
one owns the code it didn't have to
overtake the whole software economy and
become everything to become highly
valuable and then inject a different
dimension into things and I think this
the same is true with decentralized AI
which we're looking at with singularity
in that like it it doesn't we don't have
to actually put Google and the US and
Chinese military in Tencent out of
business right although if that happens
that that's that's fine but but we it's
enough that we become an extremely major
player in that ecosystem so that this
you know participatory and benefit
oriented aspect becomes a really
significant component of how humanity is
developing general intelligence what
it's accepted generally accepted that
human beings will consistently and
constantly innovate
right it just seems to be a
characteristics that that we have yep
why do you think that is and what do you
think that especially when it in terms
of creating something like artificial
intelligence like why build our
successors like why do I do that like
what is what is it about us that makes
us want to constantly make bigger better
things well that's an interesting
question in the history of biology which
I may not be the most qualified person
to answer it is an interesting question
and I think it has something to do with
the weird way in which we embody various
contradictions that we're always trying
to resolve like we you mentioned ants
and the answer social animals right
worse like cats are very individual
we're like trapped between the two all
right like we're we're somewhat
individual and and and somewhat social
and that and then and then since we
created civilization it's it's it's even
worse because I mean we have certain
aspects which are which are wanting to
conform with the group and the tribe and
others which are wanting to innovate and
break out of that and we're sort of
trapped in these biological and cultural
contradictions which tend to drive
innovation but I think there's a lot
there that no one understands and the
roots of the human psyche evolutionarily
but as an empirical fact what you said
is is is is very true right like we're
driven to seek novelty we're driven to
create new things and this is certainly
one of the factors which is driving the
creation of AI
I don't think that alone would make the
creation of AI inevitable but the thing
why don't you think it would make it
inevitable if we consistently innovate
and it's always been a concept I mean
you were talking about the concept
existing 30-plus years ago well I think
a key point is that there's tremendous
practical economic advantage and status
advantage to be gotten from AI right now
and this is driving the advancement of
AI right to be
incredibly rapid right because there are
some things that are interesting and
would use a lot of human innovation but
they get very few resources so for
example my my oldest son Zarathustra
he's doing his peach do you know what
it's just Zarathustra whoa my kids are
Zarathustra Amadeus Zebulon Ulysses
Scheherazade and then the new one is
quarks eqo rxi Wow
which is an acronym for quantum
organized rational expanding
intelligence I was never happy with Ben
it's a very boring day I'm something
more interested anyway
Zarathustra is doing his PhD on the
application of machine learning to
automated theorem proving basically make
a RS that can do mathematics better and
to me that's like the most important
thing we could be applying AI to because
you know mathematics is the key to all
modern science and engineering my PhD
was in math originally but the amount of
resources going into AI for automating
mathematics is not large at this present
moment although that's a beautiful and
amazing area for invention and
innovation and creativity so I think
what's driving our rapid push toward
building AI I mean it's not just our
creative Drive it's it's the fact
there's tremendous economic value
military value and human value I mean
curing diseases teaching kids there's
tremendous value in almost everything
that's important to human beings in in
building AI right so you put that
together with our drive to create and
innovate and this becomes an almost
unstoppable force within within human
society and what we've seen in the last
you know three to five years is suddenly
you know national leaders and titans of
industry and even like pop stars right
they've woken up to the concept that
well smarter and smarter AI is real and
this is going to get better and better
like within years two decades not
centuries to millennia so now the cats
out of the bag nobody's gonna put it
back and it's about
you know how can we direct it in the
most beneficial possible way and as you
say it doesn't have to be just one
possible way right like what right what
I look forward to personally is
bifurcating myself into an array of
possible bends like I'd like to let one
copy of me fuse itself with a superhuman
AI mind and you know but become become a
god or something beyond the God and I
wouldn't even be myself god I wouldn't
even be myself anymore right I mean you
would lose all concepts of human self
and identity but would be the point of
even holding to any of it yeah whoa
that's for the future that's for the
Mega Ben to decide Nega BAM yeah yeah on
the other hand I'd like to let one of me
remain in human form you know get get
rid of death and disease and the
psychological issues and and just live
live happily forever you know in the
people Zoo watched over by the machines
of love and grace right so I mean you
can have it doesn't have to be either/or
because once you can scan your brain and
body and 3d print new copies of yourself
you could have multiple I mean there's a
lot of mass energy in the universe in
the universe yeah that's assuming that
we can escape this planet because of you
if you're talking about was that people
if you're gonna make a suit themselves
well you live in a world with a billion
Donald Trump's because like literally
that's what we're talking about well the
people being able to reproduce
themselves and just having this idea
that they would like their ego to exist
in multiple different forms whether it's
some super symbiotic
that's connected to artificial
intelligence or some biological form
that's immortal or some other form that
stands just as a normal human being as
we know it in 2018 have you have
multiple versions of yourself over and
over and over again like that that's
what your well once again once you get
to the point where you have a superhuman
general intelligence that can do things
like fully scan the human brain and body
and 3d print more of them by that point
you're at a level where scarcity of
material resources is not an issue at
the human scale of doing
so I've actually of Human Resources in
terms of what scarcity of mass energy
scarcity of molecules to print more
copies of yourself and I think that I
think that's not going to be the the
issue at that point but people are
worried about as environmental concerns
of overpopulation yes people are worried
about what they see in front of their
faces right now but people are not most
people are not thinking deeply enough
about what potential would be there once
you had superhuman a eyes doing the
calculation manufacturing and the
thinking I mean I mean the the amount of
energy in the single grain of sand if
you had an AI able to to appropriately
leverage that that energy is is
tremendously more than most than most
people think and the amount of computing
power in a grain of sand it's like a
quadrillion times all the people on
earth put together so I mean what do you
mean by that the amount of computing
power there's well the amount of
computing power that could be
attentively fit reorganizing the
elementary particles in the ground of
CERN yeah there there's there's a number
in physics called the beacon stone bound
which is the maximum amount of
information that can be can be stored in
a certain amount of mass energy so that
that if the laws of physics as we know
them now are correct which they
certainly aren't then the then that
would be the amount of computing you can
do in a certain amount of mass energy
we're very very far from that limit
right now right so I mean but my point
is once you have something a thousand
times smarter than people what we
imagined to be the limits no doesn't
matter too much any issues that we're
dealing with in terms of environmental
concerns that could all potentially
almost certainly going to be irrelevant
right there may be others problem issues
that we can't even conceive at this
moment the first but the intelligence
would be so vastly superior to what we
have currently yeah they'll be able to
find solutions to virtually a single
problem that's right Ashima
ocean fish depopulation all that stuff
so just arrangements of molecules but
but don't want to hear that though
environmental people don't want to hear
that well I mean I I'm also on the
everyday life basis like until we have
these super a eyes I don't like the
garbage washing up on the beach near my
house either right so I mean but on the
everyday basis of course we want to
promote health in our bodies and in our
in our environments right now as long as
there's you know measurable uncertainty
regarding when the benevolent super a
eyes will come about so I think the main
question isn't whether once you have
been officially disposed super AI it
could solve all our current petty little
problems the question is you know can we
wade through you know the muck of modern
human society and psychology to create
this beneficial super AI in the first
place like I I believe I know how to
create a beneficial super AI but it's a
lot of a lot of work to get there and of
course there's many teams around the
world working on vaguely similar
projects now and it's not obvious what
kind of super AI we're actually gonna
get once we get there yeah it's all just
guesses at this point right it's
educated guesses depending on who's
doing the guessing would you say that
it's almost like we're in a race of the
the primitive primate biology versus the
potentially beneficial and benevolent
artificial intelligence that this the
best aspects of this primate can create
that it's almost a race to get who's
gonna win is it the warmongers and the
greedy whores that are smashing the
world under its boots or is it the
scientists that are gonna figure out
some super intelligent way to solve all
of our problems I look at it more as I
look at it more as as a struggle between
different modes of social organization
than individual people I mean look what
when I worked in DC with intelligence
agencies most of the people I met there
were really nice human beings who
believed they were doing the best for
the world
even if some of the things that we're
doing like I I thought were very much
not for the best of the world right so
I'm in military mode of organization or
large corporations as a mode of
organization are in my view not
generally going to lead to beneficial
outcomes for the overall species and
then for the global brain and the
scientific community the open source
community I think are better modes of
organization and you know the the better
aspects of the blockchain and crypto
community have a better mode of
organization so I think if if this sort
of open decentralized mode of
organization can marshal more resources
as opposed to this centralized
authoritarian mode of organization then
I think things are going to come out for
the better and it's it's not so much
about bad people versus good people that
you can look at like the corporate mode
of organization is almost a virus that
that's colonized a bunch of humanity and
is is sucking people into working
according to the to this mode and even
if they're really good people and the
individual tasks they're working on
isn't bad in itself they're working
within this new this mode that's leading
their work to be used for ultimately a
non good end yeah that is a fascinating
thing about corporations isn't it that
the diffusion of responsibility and
being a part of a gigantic group that
you as an individual don't feel
necessarily connected or responsible to
the whole even the CEO isn't fully
responsible like if the CEO does
something that isn't in accordance with
the high higher goals of the
organization they're just replaced right
something there I mean there's no one
person who's in charge it's really like
it's it's like a net column that's like
it's like its own organism yeah and I
mean it's us who have let these
organisms become parasites on humanity
in this way in some ways the Asian
countries are a little more intelligent
than Western countries and the Asian
governments realize the power of
corporations to molds
and there's a bit more feedback between
the government and and and corporations
which can be for better or for worse but
then in America there's some ethos of
like free markets and free enterprise
which is really not taking into account
the oligopolistic nature of modern
markets but in Asian countries isn't it
that the government is actually
suppressing information as well they're
also suppressing Google in South Korea
no I'm in South Korea if you look at
what the only ones
well Singapore you know really Singapore
is ruthless in their drug laws and some
of the archaic well so as us they're far
worse though Singapore gives you the
death penalty for marijuana they do yeah
yeah I mean the South Korea is an
example which has roughly the same level
of personal freedoms as the u.s. more in
some ways less than others massive
electronica innovation well interesting
their thing there politically is I mean
they were poorer than two-thirds of
sub-saharan African nations in the late
60s and it is through the government
intentionally stimulating corporate
development toward manufacturing and
electronics that they grew up so that
that now I mean I'm not holding that up
as a great Paragon for the future or
anything but it does show that there's
there's many modes of organization of
people and resources other than the ones
that we take for granted in the US I
don't think Samsung and LG are the ideal
for the future either though I mean I'm
much more interested in you know
interested in blockchain I'm interested
in I'm interested an open source and I'm
interested in in blockchain I'm
basically I'm interested in anything
that's you know open and participatory
disruptive right as well yeah because I
think that's I think that is the way to
be ongoingly dis disruptive an open
source is a good example of that like
when the open source movement started
they weren't thinking about machine
learning but you know the the
that open-source is out there and is
then prevalent in the software world
that paved the way for AI to now be
centered on open source algorithms so
right now even though big companies and
governments dominate the scaleable
rollout of AI the invention of new AI
algorithms is mostly done by people
creating new code and putting it putting
it on on github or get lab where their
open source repository posit or E's open
source is self-explanatory in its title
pretty much people kind of understand
what it is it means that various coders
get to share in this this code and the
source code and they they get to
innovate and they all get to participate
and use each other's work right right
but blockchain is confusing for a lot of
people yeah please explain that sure I
mean but block blockchain itself is
almost a misnomer so we're confused okay
they're confusing it at every level
right so we can should start with the
idea of a distributed ledger which is
basically like a distributed Excel
spreadsheet or database it's just a
store of information which is not stored
just in one place where there's copies
of it in a lot of different places every
time my copy of it is updated everyone
else's copy of it has got to be updated
and then then there's various bells and
whistles like sharding where you know it
can be broken in many pieces and each
piece is stored many places or something
so that's a distributed ledger and
that's just distributed computing now
what what makes it more interesting is
when you layer it decentralized control
onto that so imagine you have this
distributed Excel spreadsheet or
distributed database there's copies of
it stored in a thousand places but to
update it you need like five hundred of
those thousand people who own the copies
to vote yeah let's do that update right
so then then you have a distributed
store of data and you have like a
democratic voting mechanism to determine
when all those copies can get can get
updated together right so then then what
you have is a data storage and update
mechanism that's controlled in a
democratic way by the group of
participants rather than mining one
central control
and that that can have all sorts of
advantages I mean for one thing it means
that you know there's no one controller
who can go rogue and screw with all the
day without telling anyone it also means
there's no one who's some lunatic can go
hold a gun to their head and shoot them
for for what data updates were made cuz
they're you know it's controlled
democratically by by everybody right it
has ramifications in terms of you know
legal defensibility and I mean you could
have some people and Iran some in China
some in the US and and updates to this
whole distributed data store are made by
democratic decision of all the
participants somewhere cryptography
comes in is when I vote I don't have to
say yeah this is been Gertz all voting
for this update to be accepted or not
it's just ID number one three five seven
two six four and then encryption is used
to make sure that you know it's it's the
same guy voting every time that it
claims to be with it without needing
like your passport number or something
right what's ironic about is it's
probably one of the best ways ever
conceived to actually vote in this
country yeah sure kind of ironic there's
a lot of applications for that yeah
that's that's right so that there's so
that that I mean that's the core
mechanism though where the blockchain
comes from is like a data structure
where to store the data in this
distributed database it's stored in in a
chain of blocks or each block contains
data the thing is not every so called
blockchain system even uses a chain of
locks not like some use a a tree or a
graph of blocks or something this is
that tom was everybody it's it's an
alright term is it like AI like just one
of those terms were stuck with yeah yeah
it's one it's one of those terms were
stuck with even though it's not quite
technically not quite technically
accurate and I mean anymore I mean
because what I don't know another buzz
word for it right what it is is a it's a
distributed ledger with encryption a
decentralized control
yeah and blockchain is the buzzword
that's come about for that know what
what got me interested in blockchain
really is this decentralized control us
so my my wife why been with for 10 years
now she dug up recently something I'd
forgotten which is a webpage had made in
1995 like a long time ago where I'd said
hey I'm gonna run for president on the
decentralization platform for her which
I'd completely forgotten that crazy idea
I was very young then that had no idea
what an annoying job being president
would be right but that so that the idea
of decentralized control seemed very
important to me back then which is well
before Bitcoin was invented because I
could see you know a global brain is
evolving on the planet involving humans
computers communication devices and we
don't want this global brain to be
controlled by a small elite we want the
global prime to be controlled in the in
the decentralized ways so that that's
really the the beauty of this blockchain
infrastructure and what what got me
interested in the practical technologies
of blockchain was really one theory
inque mout and you add the notion of a
smart contract which was a theorem a
theory amia so what is that well so the
first blockchain technology was Bitcoin
right which is a well known
cryptocurrency no theory 'm is another
cryptocurrency which is the number two
cryptocurrency right now that's how out
of the loop I am did you know about it
you did however aetherium came along
with a really nice software framework so
it's not just like a digital money like
bitcoin is but aetherium has a
programming language called solidity
that came with it and this programming
language lets you write what are called
smart contracts and again that's sort of
a misnomer because a smart contract
doesn't have to be either smart or a
contract right but but it was a cool
name right what are you in then if it's
really a smart contract contract it's
like a programmable transaction okay so
you you can program a legal contract or
you can program of a financial
transaction so a smart contract it's a
it's a persistent piece of software
that embodies like a secure encrypted
transaction between between multiple
parties so pretty much like anything on
the back end of a bank's website or
transaction between two companies online
a purchasing relationship between you
and the website online this could all be
scripted in the smart contract in the
secure way and then it would be
automated in this simple and standard
way so the vision that Vitalik butyrin
who was the main creator behind
aetherium had is to basically make the
internet into a giant computing
mechanism rather than mostly like an
information storage and retrieval
mechanism make the internet into a giant
computer by making a really simple
programming language for scripting
transactions among different computers
and different parties on the internet
where you have encryption and you have
democratic decision-making and
distributed storage of information like
programmed into this this world computer
right and then that was a really cool
idea and the etherium blockchain and
solidity programming language made it
really easy to do that so made it really
easy to program like distributed secure
transaction and computing systems on the
internet so I saw this I thought wow
like now we finally have the toolset
that's needed to implement some of these
pillars it's very popular yeah I mean I
mean basically almost every ICO that was
done the last couple years was done on
the ethereum blockchain
what's an ICO initial coin offering okay
so for bitcoins for I'm sorry
cryptocurrency crypto currencies yeah
use this technology yeah yes rings right
so what happened in the last couple
years is a bunch of people realized you
could use this aetherium programming
framework to create a new cryptocurrency
right like a new artificial money and
then you could try to get people to use
your new artificial money for certain
types of how many artificial coral coin
thousands maybe more
and but I mean how many popular is
Bitcoin right the point is Bitcoin is by
far the most popular the most aetherium
is number two and there's a bunch of
others I mean how would comparison like
how much bigger is Bitcoin than
aetherium I don't know five factor of
three to five yeah well maybe just a
factor of two no it's actually last year
at thorium almost took over Bitcoin when
Bitcoin start crashing yeah yeah and now
a theorem is back down it might be 1/2
or 1/3 does that worry you the the
fluctuating value of these well to my to
my mind creating artificial monies is
one tiny bit of the potential of what
you could do with the whole blotching
tool said it it happened to become
popular initially right because it's
where the money is right it is it is
money and that's interesting to people
but on the other hand what it's really
about is making world computer it's
about scripting with a simple
programming language all sorts of
transactions between people companies
whatever all sorts of exchanges of
information so I mean it's about
decentralized voting mechanisms it's
about AI is being able to send data and
processing it for each other and pay
each other for their transactions so I
mean there's it's about automating
supply chains and and and shipping and
ecommerce so that there's an in in in in
essence you know just like computers and
the internet started with a certain
small set of applications and then
pervaded almost everything right yeah
it's the same way with blockchain
technology like it started with digital
money but the core technology is is
gonna pervade almost everything because
there's almost no domain of human
pursuit that couldn't use like security
through cryptography some sort of you
know participatory decision-making and
then distributed storage of information
right so and these things are also
valuable for AI which is how I got into
it in the first place I mean
if you're making a very very powerful AI
that is going to you know gradually
through the practical value delivers he
will grow up to be more and more and
more intelligent I mean that this AI
should be able to engage a large party
of people and AIS and participatory
decision-making they I should be able to
store information you know in a widely
distributed way and and they I certainly
shouldn't be able to use you know
security and encryption to validate who
are the parties involved in its
operation I mean these are the key
things behind behind blockchain
technology so I mean the fact the fact
that blockchain began with artificial
currencies to me is a detail of history
just like the fact the fact that the
internet began is like a nuclear early
warning system right then it did it's
good for that but it's as it happens
it's also even better for a lot of other
things yeah the the solution for the
financial situation that we find
ourselves in it's one of the more
interesting things about
cryptocurrencies that someone said okay
look obviously we all kind of agree that
our financial institutions are very
flawed the system that we operate under
is it's very fucked up so how do we fix
that
well sending the super nerds and so they
figure out a new and we're going to send
into super is super super I mean
obviously who's the guy that they think
the this fake person this may be not
real that came up with Bitcoin
oh so Toshi Nakamoto do you have any
suspicions as to who this is I can
neither confirm nor deny okay yeah you
wouldn't be on the inside we'll talk
later
but that this is it's very it's very
interesting but it's also very promising
I I've like high optimism for crypto
currencies because I think that kids
today are looking at it with much more
open eyes than you know grandfather's
grandfather's are looking at Bitcoin
again I'm sure you're exceptional one
but there's a lot of people that are
older that just they're not open to
accepting these ideas but I think
kids today in particular the ones that
have grown up with the internet as a
constant force in their life they're I
think they're more likely to embrace
something along those lines well yet so
that there's no doubt that you know
cryptographic formulations of money are
going to become the standard the
question do you think that's going to be
the standard that will happen yeah
however it could happen potentially in
the very uninteresting way how's that
but you could just have the e dollar I
mean the I mean that government could
just say we will create this
cryptographic token which counts as a
dollar I mean most dollars are just
electronic anyway all right so so what
what what habitually happens is
technologies that are invented to
subvert the establishment are converted
to a form where they help bolster the
establishment instead I mean and in
financial services this happens very
rapidly like PayPal Peter Thiel and
those guys started PayPal thinking they
were gonna obsolete fiat currency and
make an alternative to the currencies
run by nation-states instead they were
driven to make it a credit card
processing front end right so so that's
one thing that could happen with
cryptocurrency is it just becomes a
mechanism for you know governments and
big companies and banks to do the things
more efficiently so what what's
interesting isn't so much the digital
money aspect although it is in some ways
a great way to do digital money but
what's interesting is with all the
flexibility it gives you to script you
know complex computing networks in there
is the possibility to script new forms
of you know participatory Democratic
self-organizing networks so blockchain
like the internet or computing is a very
flexible medium you could use it to make
tools of oppression or or you could use
it to make tools of amazing growth
growth and and liberation and obviously
we know which one I'm more interested in
ya know what what is blockchain
what is blockchain being currently used
for like what what different
applications cuz it's not just
cryptocurrency they use know a bunch of
different things now right they are I
would say it's very early stage so
probably the how early well
the heaviest uses a blockchain now are
probably inside large financial services
companies actually so if you look at
theory him the project dimensions so he
theorem is run by an open source and
open foundation the etherium foundation
then there's a consulting company called
consensus which is a totally separate
organization that was founded by joe
Lubin who was one of the founders of
etherium in the early days and consensus
as you know it's funded about to the
work within the etherium foundation and
community but consensus has done a lot
of contracts just working with
governments and big companies to
customize code based on etherium to help
with their internal operations so
actually a lot of the practical value
has been with stuff that isn't in the
public odd that much but it's like
back-end inside of companies and in
terms of practical customer facing uses
of of cryptocurrency i mean now the tron
blockchain which is different than
aetherium that has a bunch of games on
it for example and some online gambling
for the for that mother so that that's
that that's gotten a lot of users but
their online games like how do they use
that well it's a payment mechanism i say
but that there this is one of the things
there's a lot of hand-wringing about in
the cryptocurrency world now is gambling
no just the fact that there aren't that
many big consumer facing uses of
cryptocurrency I mean I mean everyone
would everyone would like there to be
that was the idea and this is one of the
things we're aiming at with our
singularity net project is to you know
we by putting a I on the blockchain in a
highly effective way and then we're also
we have these two tiers so we
of the singularity net foundation which
is is creating this open-source
decentralized platform in which a eyes
can talk to other AIS and you know like
ants in a colony grouped together from
smarter and smarter AI then we're
spinning off a company called the
singularity studio which will use this
decentralized platform to help big
companies integrate AI into their
operations so with the singularity
studio company we want to get all these
big companies using the AI tools in the
singularity net platform and then we
want to drive you know massive usage of
blockchain and the singularity in that
that that way so that's if we're
successful with what we're doing this
will be you know within a year from now
or something by far the biggest usage of
blockchain outside of financial exchange
is our use of blockchain within singular
unit for AI basically for customers to
get the AI services that they need for
their businesses and then for a eyes to
transact with other AI is paying other
AIS for doing services for them because
this this this I think is is a path
forward it's like a society and economy
of minds it's not like one monolithic AI
it's a whole bunch of AI is carried by
different people all over the world with
not only are in the marketplace
providing services to customers but each
AI is asking questions of each other and
then raiding each other of how good they
are sending data to each other and
paying each other for their services so
this this like network of AIS can emerge
in intelligence on the whole network
level as well as they're being
intelligence in each each component and
is it also fascinating to you that this
is not dependent upon nation so this is
a world yeah that ever I think I think
that's going to be important once once
it starts to get a very high level of
intelligence again in the early stages
okay what would it hurt like if I had
you know my own database the central
record of everything like I'm I'm an
honest person I'm not gonna rip anyone
off
but once we start to make a transition
toward artificial general intelligence
in this global decentralized Network
which has component a eyes from every
country on the planet like at that point
once it's clear you're getting toward
AGI a lot of people want to step in and
control this thing you know by law by
military might by any means necessary
by that point the fact that you have
this open decentralized network under
underpinning everything like this gives
an amazing resilience to what you're
doing like who can shut down Linux who
can shut down Bitcoin nobody can write
you you want AI you want AI to be like
that you want to be a global you know
upsurge of creativity and a mutual
benefit from people all over the planet
which no powerful party can can shut
down even if they're afraid that it
threatens their hegemony it's very
interesting because in a lot of ways
that's a it's a very elegant solution to
what's an obvious problem yeah yeah just
as the Internet is an elegant solution
to what's in hindsight an obvious
problem right it's the distribution of
it yeah yeah yeah yeah but this is a
extra special to me because it if I was
a person brought in a country I would be
terrified of this shit I'd be like well
this is what's gonna that depends which
country if you're a person running the
u.s. or China you you would have a
different relationship than if you're a
person like I know the Prime Minister of
Ethiopia RB Ahmed who's a has a degree
in software engineering and he loves
this but of course
Ethiopia isn't in any auditioning any
other countries right and they're not in
any danger of individually like taking
global AI hegemony right so for the
majority of countries in the world they
like this for the same reason they like
Linux right I mean I mean this this is
something in which they have an equal
role to anybody else right the
superpowers and you see this among
companies also those so a lot of big
companies that we're talking to they
like the idea of this decentralized AI
fabric because I mean if you're not
Amazon Google Microsoft $0.10 Facebook
so
if you're another large corporation you
don't necessarily want all your AI and
all your data to be going into one of
this handful of large AI companies you
would rather have it be in the secure
dissent decentralized platform and I
mean this is the same reason that you
know Cisco and IBM they run on Linux
they don't run on Microsoft all right so
if if you're not one of the handful of
large governments or large corporations
that happen to be in a leading role in
the AI ecosystem then you would rather
have this this equalizing and
decentralize thing because everyone gets
to play yeah what what would be the
benefit of running on Linux vs.
Microsoft well you're not at the behest
of some other big company I mean well I
mean imagine if I'm at imagine if if you
were Cisco or GM or something and all of
your internal machines are all your
servers are running in Microsoft what if
Microsoft increases their price or
remove some feature then right you're
totally it that that that their behest
right and with AI
the same thing is true I mean if if you
put all your data in some big company's
server farm and you're analyzing all
your data on their algorithms and that's
critical to your business model what if
they change their AI algorithm in some
way then I mean then your business is is
basically controlled by this other
company so huh I mean having a
decentralized platform in which you're
you know an equal participant along with
everybody else is actually a much better
position to be in and I think this this
I think is why we can succeed with this
plan of having this you know
decentralized singularity net platform
then this singularity studio enterprise
software company which mediates between
the decentralized platform and big
companies I mean it's because most
companies and governments in the world
you know they don't want hegemony of a
few large governments and corporations
Egypt either and you can see this in
in a lot of voids you can see this in
embrace of of Linux and and aetherium by
many large corporations you can also see
like in a different way you know that in
the indian government you know they
rejected an offer by facebook to give
free internet to all indians
because facebook want to give like
mobile phones that would give free
internet but only the access Facebook
right India is like well no thanks right
and India is now giving they're now
creating laws that any Internet company
that collects data about Indian people
has to store that data in India hmm
which is so the Indian government can
subpoena that data when they want to
right so so you're already seeing about
a bunch of resistance against hegemony
by a few large governments or large
large corporations by other companies
and other governments and I think this
this is very positive and is one of the
factors that can foster the posture that
the growth of a decentralized AI
ecosystem is it fair to say that the
future of AI is severely dependent upon
who launches it first
like whoever if whether it's singular so
the bottom line is the official general
intelligence the bottom line is as a
scientist I have to say we don't know
right it could be there's an end state
that AG I will just self organize into
almost independent of the initial
condition but we don't know and given
that we don't know I'm operating under
the you know the heuristic assumption
that if the first AI is been officially
oriented if it's controlled in a
participatory democratic way and if it's
oriented at least substantially towards
like doing good things for humans I'm
operating under the heuristic assumption
that this is going to bias things in a
positive positive direction right I mean
within in the absence of knowledge to
the contrary but if the Chinese
government launches one
they're controlling yeah we don't know
hop it off first I mean I like the idea
that you're saying though that it might
organize itself I mean I understand the
Chinese government also they want they
want the best for the Chinese people
that they don't they don't want to make
the Terminator either right so I mean
III think even even Donald Trump was not
my favorite person doesn't actually want
to kill off everyone on the planet right
so he might as they talk shit about him
yeah yeah yeah you know you know you
never know it was just him yeah yeah
yeah I told you yeah so I mean I think
you know I wouldn't say we're
necessarily doomed if big governments
and big companies are the ones that
develop AI or AGI Flowers's big
government big companies essentially
developed the internet right and it got
away from them that's right that's right
so there's a lot of uncertainty all
around but I think you know it behooves
us to do we can to bias the odds in our
favor based on our current understanding
and I mean toward that end we're
developing you know open-source
decentralized AI and then singularity in
that process if you would explain some
singularity net and what what you guys
are actively involved in well sure sure
so singularity net in itself is a
platform that allows many different a
eyes to operate on it and these AIS can
offer services to anyone who requests
services of the network and they can
also request and offer services among
each other so it's it's both um just an
online marketplace for AI is much like
you know the Apple App Store or Google
Play Store but for a eyes rather than
phone apps but the difference is the
different a eyes in here can outsource
work to each other and talk to each
other and that gives a new dimension to
it right where you can have we think of
as a society or economy of Minds and it
gives the possibility that this whole
Society of interacting a eyes which are
then they're paying each other for
transactions with our
our digital money or our cryptographic
token which is called the HEI token so
these AIS which are paying each other
and raiding each other of how good they
are sending data and questions and
answers to each other can self-organize
into some overall AI mind now we're
building this platform and then we're
plugging into it to seed it a bunch of a
AHS of our own creations so I've been
working for 10 years on this open source
AI project called OpenCog which is
oriented toward building general
intelligence and we're putting a bunch
of AI agents based on the open cog
platform into this singularity net
network and you know if we're successful
in a couple years the AIS that we put on
there will be a tiny minority of what's
in there just like the apps made by
Google or a small minority of the apps
and in the in the Google Play Store
right but my hope is that these OpenCog
AI agents within the larger pool of AI
from the singularity net can sort of
serve as the the general intelligence
core because the OpenCog AI agents are
really good at abstraction and
generalization and creativity we can put
another a bunch of other AIS in there
that are good at highly specific forms
of learning like predicting financial
time series curing diseases answering
people's questions organizing your ear
in box so you can have the interaction
of these specialized ai's and then more
general-purpose you know abstraction and
creativity they say eyes like open cog
agents all interacting together in this
decentralized platform and then you know
the beauty of it is like some some
fifteen-year-old genius and Azerbaijan
or the Congo can put some brilliant AI
into this network if it's really smart
it will get rated highly by the other a
eyes for its work helping them do their
thing
then it can get replicated over and over
again across many servers suddenly a
this 16 year old kid from Azerbaijan or
the Congo could become wealthy from from
their copies of their AI providing
services to other people's a eyes
and be you know the creativity in their
mind is out there and is infusing this
global a I'd network with some some new
intellectual DNA that you know never
would have been found by a ten-cent or a
Google because they're not gonna hire
some Congolese teenager who may have a
brilliant AI idea that's amazing that's
amazing so this is all ongoing right now
and there are some singularity that you
guys are using the the way I've
understood that term correct me if I'm
wrong is that it's going to be the one
innovation or one invention that
essentially changes everything forever
well singularity isn't necessarily one
invention the singularity which is
coined by Kurt well it's coined by my
friend Vernor Vinge's who's another guy
you should interview he's in San Diego -
brilliant guys down there but Vernor
Vinge is a cemetery down there
yeah Vernor Vinge he was a math
professor at a San Diego University
actually but well-known science fiction
writer his book fire upon the deep one
of the great science fiction books VI ng
e Vernor Vinge e yeah brilliant guy fire
upon the DVR any further oh yeah the ER
door yeah oh yeah he's brilliant he
coined the term technological
singularity back in the 1980s really but
he he opted not to become a pundit about
it because he'd rather write more
science fiction boats that's interesting
that a science fiction author Ray
Kurzweil who's also a good friend of
mine I mean Ray Ray took that term and
fleshed it out and did a bunch of data
analytics trying to pinpoint like when
it's gonna when it would happen but the
basic concept of the technological
singularity is a point in time when
technological advance occurs so rapidly
that to the human mind it appears almost
instantaneously like imagine 10 new
nobel prize-winning discoveries every
second or something right so this is
similar to the concept of the
intelligence explosion that was posited
by the mathematician IJ good in nineteen
sixty-five what IJ good said then the
year before I was born was the first
truly intelligent machine will be the
last invention that humanity needs to
make right right so this is an
intelligence explosion is another term
for basically the same thing as a
technological singularity but it's not
just about ai ai is just probably the
most powerful technology driving it I
mean there's AI there's nanotechnology
there's femto technology which will be
building things from elementary
particles I mean there's life extension
genetic engineering mind uploading which
is like reading the mind out of your
brain and putting putting it into a
machine you know there's advanced energy
technologies so that all these different
things are expected to advance and
around the same time and they have many
ways to boost each other right because
the you know the better AI you have
you're a I can then invent new ways of
doing nanotech and biology but if you
invent amazing new nanotech and quantum
computing that can make your AI smarter
on the other hand if you if you could
crack how the human brain works and
genetic engineering to upgrade human
intelligence those smarter humans can
then make better AI eyes and
nanotechnology right so that there's
some of the virtuous cycles among these
different technologies the more you
advance in any of them the more you're
going to advance and in all of them and
it's a coming together of all of these
that's going to create you know radical
abundance and and the technological
singularity so that that term which
Vernor Vinge II introduced Ray Kurzweil
borrowed for his books and for the the
singular the university educational
program and then we borrowed that for
our singularity net-like decentralized
blockchain based AI platform and are in
our singularity studio enterprise
software company now I want to talk to
you about two parts of what you just
said one being the possibility that one
day we can upload our mind and make
copies of our mind you up for it my
months you and I'm so into here yeah I
could use a little joe rogan for my
phone you could just call me dude
the organic version but the do you think
that that's a real possibility inside of
our lifetime that we can map out the
human mind to the point where we can
essentially recreate it but if you do
recreate it without all the biological
herbs and the human reward systems that
are built in what the fuck are we I mean
well that's a different question right I
mean I think what is your mind well I
think that there's two things that are
needed for let's say let's say human
body uploading okay
to simplify the body uploading there are
two things that are needed one thing is
a better computing infrastructure than
we have now okay to host the uploaded
body and and the other thing is a better
scanning technology because right now we
don't have a way to scan the molecular
structure of your body without like
freezing you slicing you and scanning
you which you don't want done at this
point in time right yeah
so assuming both those are solved I mean
you could then recreate in some computer
simulation you know an accurate
simulation of what you are right but
that's where I'm getting this where I'm
getting at the inaccurate simulacrum is
get that's getting weird because the
biological variability of human beings
we very day to day we very dependent
upon it and your simulation would also
very day today so of a deviate program
it in to have flaws because what we very
dependent upon how much sleep we get
whether or not we're feeling sick
whether we're lonely so it's all these
if your upload we're an accurate copy of
games then the simulation hosting your
upload would need to have an accurate
simulation of the laws of bio physics
and chemistry that allow your body to
you know evolve from one second to the
next
my concern would change second-by-second
just like just like you do and it would
diverge from you right so I mean after
an hour it will be a little different
after a year it might have gone in in a
quite different direction for you it
would probably among some super God monk
living on the top of a mountain
somewhere in a year if it keeps good
with the problem but the point whatever
depends on what
the world it's living in true I mean if
it's living in the in a virtual virtual
world there'll be a virtual world if
you're not talking about the potential
of downloading this again in sort of a
into a biologic as a lot of
possibilities right yeah I mean you you
could you could upload into a Joe Rogan
living in the virtual world and then
just create your own fantasy universe or
you or you could 3d print and altering
the synthetic body right I mean once you
have the ability to manipulate molecules
at will this the scope of possibilities
becomes much greater than we're used to
thinking like my question is do do we
replicate flaws do we replicate
repression of course but we knew that
wouldn't we want to cure depression so
if we don't cure depression here's the
interesting thing okay once once we have
you in a digital form right then it's
very programmable so then right then we
dash up the dopamine the Saratoga then
you can change what you want and then
you have a whole different set of issues
right yeah because once you've changed
I mean suppose you make a fork of
yourself and then you manipulate it in a
certain way and you're then after a few
hours you're like well I don't I don't
much like this new Joe here
maybe we should roll back that change
but the new Joe is like well I like
myself very well thank you
so then yeah there's a lot of issues
that that will come up once we can write
modify and then the reprogram or so this
is the point that the ramifications of
these decisions are almost
insurmountable once once the ball gets
rolling
well the ramifications of the
ramifications of these decisions are
going to be very interesting to explore
yes you're super positive been super
positive of your optimism any bad things
will happen many good things will happen
that's a very that's a very easy
prediction to make okay I see what
you're saying
yeah I've just a one I mean I think
think about like world travel right like
hundreds of years ago most people didn't
travel more than a very short distance
from their home and you could say well
okay what if what if people could travel
all over the
right like what horrible things could
happen they would lose their culture
like they might go marry someone from a
random tribe you can get killed in the
Arctic region or something a lot of bad
things can happen when you travel from
home a lot of good things can happen and
the ultimately the ramifications were
not foreseen by people 500 years ago
yeah I mean we're going into a lot of
new domains we can't see the details of
the plusses and minuses that are gonna
unfold it would behoove us to simply
become comfortable with radical
uncertainty because they otherwise we're
gonna confront it anyway and we're just
gonna be nervous so it's just inevitable
this is this it's almost inevitable I
mean of course
barring any natural disaster yeah yeah I
mean of course Trump could start a
nuclear war and well and then we're
resetting to Ground Zero this is like we
get hit by an asteroid right yeah I mean
so barring a catastrophic outcome I
believe a technological singularity is
essentially inevitable there's a radical
uncertainty attached to this on the
other hand you know in as much as we
humans can know anything it would seem
common sensical II there's the ability
to bias this in a positive rather than
the negative direction yeah we should be
spending more of our attention on doing
that rather than for instance
advertising spying and making chocolate
ear chocolates and all the other things
many people are doing that I mean it's
prevalent it's everywhere but I mean how
many people are actually at the helm of
that as opposed to how many people are
working on various aspects of Technology
all across the planet it's a small group
in comparison working on explicitly
bringing about the singularity is a
small group yeah on the other hand
supporting technologies is a very large
group so think about like GPUs where did
they come from accelerating gaming right
lo and behold they're amazingly useful
for training neural net models which is
one among many important types of AI
right so a large amount of the planet's
resources are now getting spent on tech
that are indirectly supporting these
singularitarians technologies so as
another example like micro Ayres and let
you measure the expression level of
genes how much each gene is doing in
your body at each point in time these
were originally developed you know as an
outgrowth of printing technology then
instead of squirting ink mometrix
figured out you could squirt DNA right
so i mean the amount of technology
specifically oriented toward the
singularity doesn't have to be large
because the overall you know spectrum of
supporting technologies can be subverted
in that direction you do you have any
concerns at all about a virtual world i
mean we may be in one right now is I
want to find that programmer and get
them to make more attractive people you
know that I would say that that's part
of the reason why attractive people are
so interested yes that they unique and
rare yeah all right problems are calling
everything beautiful yeah beautiful I
was like well you just stuff yeah let's
get realistic if I get in the right
frame of mind that can find anything
beautiful well you can find it unique
and interesting no I can find anything
view I guess I guess but in terms of
like yeah I guess it's subjective right
it really is we're talking about beauty
right yeah now but for existential angst
just on the the when people sit and
think about the pointlessness of our own
existence like we are these finite
beings that are clinging to a balls it
spins a thousand miles an hour hurling
through infinity and what's the point
there's a lot of that that goes around
already we if we create an artificial
environment that we can literally
somehow another download a version of us
and it exists and this blockchain
created or powered weird fucking
simulation world what would be I mean
what would be the point of what I really
believe which is a bit
personal and maybe different than many
of my colleagues and what I really
believe is that these advancing
technologies are going to lead us to
unlock many different states of
consciousness and experience and then
most people are currently aware of our I
mean you you say we're we're just
insignificant species on the on a you
know a speck of rock hurtling in the
other so there's people that have
existential angst cuz they wonder about
what the purpose yes I mean I don't I
ended that I tend to feel like we
understand almost nothing about who and
and what we are and our knowledge about
the universe is far smaller extremely
miniscule I mean if anything I look at
things from more of a Buddhist or a
phenomenological way like their sense
perceptions and then out of those sense
perceptions models arise and accumulate
including a model of the self and the
model of the body and the model of the
physical world out there and by the time
you get to planets and stars and
blockchains you're building like
hypothetical models on top of
hypothetical models and then you know
we're we're by building intelligent
machines and mind uploading machines and
virtual realities we're going to
radically transform you know our whole
state of consciousness our understanding
of what mind and matter are our
experience of our own selves or even
whether a self exists and I think
ultimately the state of consciousness of
a human being
like a hundred years from now after a
technological singularity is going to
bear very little resemblance to the
states of consciousness we have now
we're just gonna we're gonna see a much
wider universe than any of us now
imagine imagine to exist now this is my
own personal view of things you don't
have to
I agree with that ii think the
technological singularity will be
valuable but that is how i look at no
like Ray Kurzweil and I agree there's
gonna be a technological singularity
within decades at most and Ray and I
agree that you know if we bias
technology development appropriately we
can very lightly you know guide this to
be a world of abundance and benefit for
humans as well as a eyes but Ray is a
bit more of a down-to-earth empiricist
than than I am lucky he thinks we
understand more about the universe right
now then than I do
so hmm I mean there's a wide spectrum of
views that are rational and sensible to
have but my own view is we understand
really really little of what we are and
what what this world is and this is part
of my own personal quest for wanting to
upgrade my brain and wanting to create
artificial intelligences is like I've
always been driven above all else
borrowing to understand everything I can
about the world someone I've studied
every kind of science and engineering
and social science and read every kind
of literature but in the end the scope
of human understanding is clearly very
small although at least were smart
enough to understand how little we
understand which I think my dog doesn't
understand how little he understands
right yeah so and even like my 10 month
old son he understands how little he
understands which is interesting right
because he's a because he's also a human
right so I think I mean everything we
think and believe now is gonna seem
absolutely absurd to us after there's a
singularity we're just gonna look back
and laugh in the warm-hearted way and
all the incredibly silly things we were
thinking and doing back when we were
trapped in our in our you know our
primitive biological brains and bodies
that's stunning that that in your
opinion or your assessment is somewhere
less than a hundred years away from now
yeah that requires exponential thinking
right because if you that's harder to
wrap your head around right
no it's it's immediate for me to wrap my
head around but for a lot of people that
you explained it to I'm sure that that
that's a little bit of a roadblock no it
is it is it took me some time to get my
parents to wrap their head around
because they didn't they're not they're
not technologists but alright I mean now
I find if you get people to pay
attention and sort of lead them through
all the supporting evidence most people
can comprehend these ideas reasonably
well computers from 1970 it's hard to
grab people's attention and yeah mobile
phones that made a big difference like I
spent a lot of time in Africa in other
Sababa in Ethiopia where we have a large
AI development office and you know the
fact that mobile phones and then smart
phones have rolled out so quickly even
in rural Africa and that if it's such a
transformative impact I mean this is a
metaphor that lets people understand the
speed with what's X p'n engine happen
when you talk about yourself and you
talk about consciousness and how you
interface with the world how do you see
this I mean when you say that we might
be living in a simulation do you
actually entertain that oh yeah you do I
mean I think the word simulation is
probably wrong but yet the idea of an
empirical you know materialist physical
world is almost certainly wrong also so
I mean that's oh well again if for you
go back to a phenomenal view I mean you
could look at the mind this primary and
you know your mind is building the world
as a model as a simple explanation of
its perceptions on the other hand then
what is the mind the self is also a
model that gets built out of its
perceptions but then if I accept that
your mind has some fundamental existence
also based on the sort of I you feeling
that you're like a mind there our minds
are working together to build each other
and then and to build this world and
there
there's there's a whole different way of
thinking about reality in terms of first
and second person experience rather than
these empiricist views like this is a
computer simulation there's something
right but you still agree that this is a
physical reality that we exist in or do
you not what does that word mean that's
a weird word right it is women if what
is it your interpretation reality if you
look in in modern physics even quantum
mechanics there's something called the
relational interpretation of quantum
mechanics which says that there's no
sense in thinking about an observed
entity you can only think about an
observed cama observer pair like there's
no sense to think about some thing
except from the perspective of some
observer so that's that's even true
within our best current theory of modern
physics as induced from empirical
empirical observations but in a
pragmatic sense you know if you take a
plane and fly to China you actually land
in China I guess yeah you'd guess don't
you live there I live in Hong Kong yeah
well close to char I mean III I have an
unusual state of consciousness I mean
that's what I'm trying to get at well if
you think about it like how do you know
that you're not a brain floating in the
VAT somewhere which is being fed
illusions by a certain evil scientist
and two seconds from now it's going to
pull this simulated world disappears
then you realize you're just a brain of
the Vatican you don't know that you run
it but and your own personal experiences
of falling in love with a woman and
moving to another but these may all be
put into my brain by the evil scientist
how do we know but they're they're very
consistent are they not the the possibly
illusory and implanted memories are very
consistent I guess I guess my own state
of mind is I'm always sort of acutely
aware that this simulation might I'll
disappear at that dunny at any one
moment I'm so cutely aware of this
consciously on an everyday basis yes
pretty much really yeah really why is
that that does
seemed to make sense I mean it's it's
pretty it's pretty rock-solid it's here
every day I mean so so you're possibly
implanted memories lead you to believe
yes possibly implanted memories need to
believe that this life is incredibly
consistent yeah incredibly consistent
this is you Humes problem of induction
right from philosophy class and and it's
not and then it's not solved I'm with
you in a conceptual sense I get I just
feel this philosophy but you you embody
it right this is something you carry
with you all the time
yeah on the other hand I mean I'm still
carrying out many actions with long term
planning in like I've been I've been
working on designing AI for 30 years and
I be designing it inside a syndrome I
might be and I'm working on building the
same AI system you know since we started
OpenCog in 2008 but that's using code
from 2001 that I was building with my
colleagues even even earlier so I mean I
think long-term planning is very natural
to me but but nevertheless I don't I
don't want to make any assumptions about
about what sort of what sort of
simulation or a reality that that that
we're living in yeah and I think
everyone's going to hit a lot of
surprises one wants to simulate
singularity K you know we we may find
out that this hat is a messenger from
after the singularity so it traveled
back through time to implant into my
brain the idea of how to create AI and
thus let's bring it into existence well
who it no that was McKenna that had this
idea that was something in the yes to
this attractor Terence Mckenna yeah yeah
he had the same idea like some posts
post singularity intelligence we talked
she was living outside of time somehow
yeah he's reaching back and putting into
his brain the idea of how to bring about
the singularity not just that but
novelty itself was being drawn into this
yeah there was a time wave zero that was
gonna reach to the apex in 2012 that
didn't work no he died before that so he
a chance to hear what his what his idea
was yeah you know I had some funny
interactions with some McKenna fanatic
2012 votes this was about 2007 or so
this guy came to Washington where I was
living then and he brought my friend
Hugo de garis another crazy a Irish
researcher with him and he's like the
singularity is gonna happen in 2012
concerns McKenna said so and we need to
be sure it's it's a good singularity so
you can't move to China then it will be
a bad singularity so we have so we have
to get the US government to give
billions of dollars to your research to
guarantee that the singularity in 2012
is a good singularity right so he he led
us around to meet with these generals
and various high who has an in DC to get
them to fund Hugo de garis is in my AI
research to guarantee I wouldn't move to
China and you go wouldn't move to China
so the US would create a positive
singularity know the effort failed you
got you go move to China then I moved
there some years after so then this that
this 2012 I he went back to his
apartment he made a mix of 50% vodka 50%
robitussin PM he like drank it down he's
like alright I'm gonna have my own
personal singularity right here and I
haven't talked to that guy since 2012
either to see what he thinks today about
the singularity not happening then but I
mean Terence Mckenna had a lot of
interesting ideas but I felt you know he
he mixed up this the symbolic with the
empirical more than the now what I would
prefer to do I mean right I mean it's
it's very interesting to look at these
abstract symbols and cosmic insights but
then you have to sort of put your
scientific mindset on they say well
what's a metaphor and what's what's like
an actual empirical scientific truth
with
within the scientific domain that he's a
little bit half-baked right I mean the
whole idea was based on the II Ching he
was a mushroom ayahuasca it was now a
skirt what's it I think led him to the
the II Ching I don't believe it was
maybe I mean it was psilocybin it might
have been okay yeah I mean I know you
know his brother Dennis yes I know very
well yes so they yeah you brother thanks
at the time we've zero was a little bit
nonsense he read their their book with
true hallucinations yeah yeah very very
very very interesting stuff and that
there's a mixture of deep insight there
yeah with a bunch of interesting
metaphorical things that's the problem
get involved in psychedelic drugs it's
hard to differentiate like what makes
sense what's what's this unbelievably
powerful insight and what is just some
crazy idea you can learn the
differentiation you think so yes yeah
but but yeah I mean granted Terence
Mckenna
probably took more psychedelic drugs
than I would generally recommend was
speaking all the time and there's
something that I can attest you from
podcasting all the time sometimes you're
just talking you don't know what the
fuck you're saying you know and you
become a prisoner to your words and in a
lot of ways you you you get locked up in
this idea of expressing this thought
that may and I may not be viable I'm not
sure that he was after empirical truth
and in the same sense that say Ray
Kurzweil is like when Ray is saying
we're gonna get human-level AI in 2029
and then you know massively superhuman
AI in a singularity in 2045 I mean Ray
Ray is very literal like he's plotting
charts right I mean Terrence Terrence
was thinking on an impressionistic and
and symbolic level does is a it was a
bit different so you have to take that
in a poetic sense rather than in a
literal sense and yeah I think it's very
interesting
to go back and forth between the you
know the symbolic and poetic domain and
the either concrete science and
engineering domain right but it's also
valuable to to be able to draw that draw
that distinction right because yeah you
can draw a lot of insight from the kind
of thinking Terence Mckenna was was
doing and certainly if you explore
psychedelics you can gain a lot of
insights into how the mind and universe
work but then when you put on your
science and engineering mindset you want
to be rigorous about which insights do
you take and which ones view do you
throw out and ultimately you want that
you want to proceed on the basis of what
works and what doesn't right I mean that
Dennis was pretty strong on that yes
Terence was a bit less in that empirical
direction
well the dennis is actually a career
scientist yeah yeah how many people
involved in artificial intelligence are
it also educated in the ways of
psychedelics uh-uh yeah that's all you
have to say is that unfortunately did
the illegal nature these Young's it's a
little hard to pin down I would say
before the recent generation of people
going into AI because it was a way to
make money the AI field was incredibly
full of really really interesting people
and you know deep thinker is about about
the mind and in the last few years of
course AI has replaced like business
school is what your grandma wants you to
do to have a good career so I mean
you're getting you're getting a lot of
people into AI just because it's
financially well yeah it's it's cool
it's frankly viable it's popular because
I can you know in our generation AI was
not a I was not what your grandma wanted
you to do so as to be able to buy a nice
house and surround a family right so you
got into it because you really were
curious about how the mind works and of
course many people played with
psychedelics because it also they were
curious about you know what it was
teaching him about about how their mind
works yeah I had a nice long
conversation with Ray Kurzweil and
we talked for about an hour and a half
and for this sci-fi show that I was
doing at the time and some of his ideas
he has this is this is number that they
had they people throw about it's like 20
42 right isn't that is that still 2045
is it 45 now you know you're being the
optimist now you're combining that with
Douglas Hofstadter's 42 which is the
answer to the universe no the 2032 thing
was a New York conference that was my
place in 2000 that was 2045 was it I was
at that conference
okay that was organized by Dmitry Itskov
was not oh you're right another friend
of mine from Russia so I'm off by three
it's 2045 that was no that was raised
prognosticators why why that year um he
did some calculations yeah I mean he
looked at Moore's law he looks in the
the advanced and the accuracy of brain
scanning look at the advance of computer
memory the miniaturization of various
devices and like plotting a whole bunch
of these curves that was the best guess
that he came out with what am I see
course there's some confidence interval
around that what do you see as potential
monkey wrenches that could be thrown
until all this innovation like what
where that where the pitfalls well I
mean the pitfall is always the one that
you that you don't see I mean of course
it's possible there's some science or
engineering obstacle that that we're not
foreseeing right now
I mean it's also possible that all major
nations are overtaken by like religious
fanatics or something which which slows
down development some will have a few
thousand years I think it would just be
by a few decades yeah I mean in terms of
scientific pitfalls I mean one
possibility which I don't think is
luckily one pus but it's possible one
possibility is human-like intelligence
requires advanced quantum computers hmm
like it can't be done on the standard
classical digital computer right do you
think that's the game no but on the
other hand because there's no evidence
that human cognition relies on quantum
effects in the human brain like based on
everything
about neuroscience now it seems not to
be the case like there's no evidence
it's the case but it's possible it's the
case because we don't understand
everything about how the brain works the
thing is even if that's true like
there's loads of amazing research going
on in quantum computing right and so
we're gonna have you know you'll
probably have a qpu quantum processing
unit in your phone and like 10 to 20
years or something right so I mean so
that would that might throw off the 2045
date but in a historical sense it
doesn't change the picture like I've got
a bunch of research sitting on my
harddrive on how we improve open Coggs
AI using quantum computers once we have
better quantum computers right so
there's there could be other things like
that which are technical roadblocks that
we're not seeing now but I really doubt
those are gonna delay things by more
than like a decade or two or something
on the other hand things could also go
faster than then then Ray's prediction
which is which is what I'm pushing
towards so what are you pushing towards
what do you think I would like to get a
human level general intelligence in five
to seven years from now Wow I don't
think that's but by any means impossible
because I think our OpenCog design is
adequate to do it
but I mean it takes a lot of people
working coherently for a while to build
something something big well this being
cased in the physical form of a robot
it'll be in the compute cloud I mean it
can use many robots as user interfaces
but the same way I could control many
different robots actually and many other
sensors and systems besides robots I
mean I think the human-like form factor
like we have with Sophia and our other
Hansen robots the human-like form factor
is really valuable as a tool for
allowing the cloud-based AI mind to you
know engage with humans and to learn
human cultures and values because get I
mean getting back to what we were
discussing at the beginning of this chat
you know the best way to get human
values and culture into the AI is for
humans and eyes to enter into many
shared like social-emotional embodied
situations together so having a
human-like embodiment for the
is important for that like I could look
you in the eye I can share your facial
expressions it can bond with you it can
see the way you react when you see like
a sick person by the side of the road
there's something right and and you know
can see you ask the AI to get give the
homeless person the twenty dollars or
something I mean the AI understands what
money is and understands what that
action means something interacting with
an AI in human-like form is gonna be
valuable as a learning mechanism for the
AI and there's a learning mechanism for
people to get more comfortable with a
eyes but I mean ultimately one advantage
of being you know a digital mind is you
don't have to be weathered any
particular embodiment I can go between
many different bodies and they can
transfer knowledge between the many
different bodies that it's occupied well
that's the real concern that the the
people that are that have this dystopian
view of artificial intelligence have is
that AI may already exist it's just
sitting there waiting til Americans are
too many bad movies in in Asia in Asia
everyone thinks AI will be our friend
and will love us and tell us yeah you're
very very very much that's what you're
pumping out there
no that's business their philosophies
there I guess I mean you look in
Japanese anime I mean there's been a
eyes and robots for a long time there
they're usually people's friends
dystopian aesthetic and it's the same in
China in Korea the general guests there
is it a eyes and robots will be people's
friends and will will help people and
somehow the general guests in America is
it's going to be some big nasty Robo
soldier marching down the street well we
have guys like yeon musk who we rely
upon
smarter than us and he's fucking
terrified of it sam harris terrified of
it you're very smart people that just
think it could really be a huge disaster
for the human race is not just bad
because no it's it's a cultural thing
because the oriental culture is sort of
social good oriented most Orientals
think a lot in terms of what's good for
the
earlier the society as opposed to
themselves personally and so they just
make the default assumption that guys
are gonna be the same way worse
Americans are more like mimimi oriented
and I say that as an American as well
and that's when they sort of assumed
that a eyes are gonna be that that's
possible it's like a bra it's like a
Rorschach blot right well whatever is in
your mind you impose on this AI when we
don't actually know what it's gonna
become right but there it is there are
potential negative aspects of course
artificial intelligence deciding that
we're illogical and unnecessary well we
aren't allowed to go and unnecessary yes
but that doesn't mean that I should be
badly disposed toward us I mean yeah did
you see ex machina I did it like it sure
it was a copy of our robot so it was I
mean our robot Sophia looks exactly like
the robot in the next American uh so is
a good video that online yeah yeah yeah
it would tell Jamie how to get the good
video oh just search for Sophia Hansen
robot on Google you how advanced is
Sophia right now only how many different
iterations have there been there's been
something like 16 Sophia robots made so
far we're moving towards scalable
manufacturer over the next couple years
so right right now she's going around
sort of as an ambassador for humanoid
robot kind giving giving speeches and
talks in various places so she Sophia
used to be called Eva or we had a robot
like the current Sophia that was called
Eva and then exhibition that came out
with a robot called Ava that exactly
like the robot that that my colleague
David Hanson and I made I think it's
coincidence of course not they just
copied it and I mean of course the body
they have is better and the AI is better
in the movie and our robot AI currently
is so we change the name to Sophia which
means wisdom and instead but I mean was
it freaky watching that though with the
name Ava the thing is the more
of that movie is just if you know if a
sociopath
raises a robot with an abusive
interaction it may come out to be a
sociopath or a psychopath so let's let's
let's not do that right let's raise our
robots with lovin that's an offering
compassion yeah you see the thing is
that if we the familiar this I haven't
seen this particular how much is it
actually interacting with them it really
has a nice ring so yes so fear we can
run using many different AI systems so
that there's a chatbot which is sort of
like you know Alexa or
Google now or something yeah but with a
bit a bit better AI and interaction with
with you know emotion and face
recognition and so forth so it's not
human level AI but it's responding to it
yeah yeah yeah it's it's f know it
understands we say and it comes up with
an answer and it can look you in the eye
and that may take more than one language
well right now we can load it in English
mode Chinese motor Russian mode and
there's sort of different different
software packages and we also use her
sometimes to experiment with their
OpenCog system and singularity in that
so we can we can use the robot as a
research platform if you're exploring
some of our more advanced AI tools and
then there is a simpler chatbot software
which is used for appearances like like
like that one then in the next year we
want to roll out more of our advanced
research software from OpenCog and
singular you know roll out more that
inside these robots which is one among
many applications we're looking at with
our singularity in that platform I want
to get you back in here in like a year
and find out where everything is because
I feel like we need someone like you
sort of let us know where where it's at
when it's written that when the switch
is about to flip it seems to me that it
might happen so quickly and the change
might take place so rapidly that we
would really will have no idea what's
happening before it happens I mean we
think about the singularity like it's
going to be some huge like physical
event and suddenly everything turns
purple and this cover with diamonds or
something right but I mean there's a lot
of voice something like this could
unfold so I can imagine that with our
singularity net decentralized AI network
you know we get an AI that's smarter
than humans and can create you know a
new scientific discovery the Nobel Prize
level every minute there's something
that that doesn't mean this AI is going
to immediately like refactor all matter
into into images of Buckethead or do
something rather I mean I mean if the AI
has some carrying and wisdom and
compassion then whatever changes happen
but it's not art those human
characteristics not necessarily in fact
human passion just as humans are neither
the most intelligent nor the most
compassionate possible creatures that
that's possibly clear if you look at the
world around you and one of our projects
that we're doing with the Sophia robot
is aimed exactly at AI compassion this
is called the loving AI project and
we're using the Sofia robot as a
meditation assistant so so we're using
Sophia to help people get into deep like
meditative trance States and help them
you know breathe deeply and achieve more
more positive state of being and part of
the goal there is to help people part of
the goal as as the AI gets more and more
intelligent you sort of getting the AI
locked in to a very positive reflective
and compassion state and I think I think
there's a lot of things in the human
psyche and evolutionary history that
hold us back from being optimally
compassionate and that if we create the
a
in the right way it will be not only
much more intelligent but much more
compassionate than then human beings are
and I'm in this we'd better do that like
otherwise the human race is it's
probably screwed to be blunt I mean if I
think human beings are creating a lot of
other technologies not with a lot of
power we're creating synthetic biology
we're creating nanotechnology you know
we're creating smaller and smaller
nuclear weapons and we can't control
their proliferation we're poisoning our
our environment I think if we can't
create something that's not only more
intelligent but more
why isn't compassionate than we are
we're probably going to destroy
ourselves by some method or another I
mean with something like Donald Trump
becoming president you see what happens
when this you know primitive you know
hindbrain
and when our are unchecked you know
mammalian emotions of anger and and you
know state is seeking an ego and rage
and lust when these things are
controlling these highly advanced
technologies this this is not gonna come
to a good end so we want compassionate
general intelligences and this is what
we should be orienting ourselves toward
and so we need to shift the focus of the
AI and technology development on the
planet toward you know benevolent
compassionate general intelligence and
this is subtle right because you need to
work with the establishment rather than
overthrowing it which isn't going to be
viable so this is while we're creating
this decentralized self-organizing AI
network the singularity net then we're
creating it for profit companies
singularity studio which will get large
enterprises to use this decentralized
network then we're creating these robots
like Sofia which will be mass
manufactured in the next couple years
roll these out of the service robots
everywhere around the world to interact
with people in the you know providing
valuable services in homes and offices
but also interacting with people you
know in a loving and compassionate ways
so we we need to start now because we
don't actually know if it's going to be
years or decades
before we get to this singularity and we
want to be as sure as we can that when
we get there it happens in the in the
beneficial way for everyone right and
things like robots blockchain and AI
learning algorithms are our tools toward
that end well Ben I appreciate your
optimism
I appreciate coming in here explaining
all this stuff for us and I appreciate
all your work man it's really amazing
fascinating stuff yeah yeah well thanks
for having me it's really fun there what
wide-ranging conversation so yeah would
it would be great to come back next year
and do it
updating you on the state of the
singular schedule it once a year and
just by the time you come maybe who
knows a year from now the world might be
a different totally different place I
may be a robot but I might be a rope
like a robot now yeah all right thank
you
[Music]